#Galvanize Capstone Project: Forecasting Wave Energy along the Northern California Coast


## Overview: 

While wind and solar have been leading sources of renewable energy, waves are increasingly being recognized as a viable source of power for coastal regions. One of the major issues in integrating renewable energy into the electrical grid is uncertainty with short-term forecasts. Knowing in advance when an increase in electricity is on the way is an important part of the grid integration process. It turns out, the energy produced by waves is a lot easier to forecast than energy produced by wind or the sun. In my project, I use data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to predict certain wave properties that dictate the amount of usable energy generated by a specific wave energy converter, The Pelamis.  I also analyzed past data to see how much energy could have theoretically been contributed to California’s electrical grid with one of these wave energy ‘farms’, consisting of forty of these machines.

## Background

The Pelamis converter utilizes the wave period and the wave height to produce energy. Thus these are the variables I needed to predict to analyze energy output. The forecast window for grid integration is one to five hours, so this is the forecast window I focused on. Forecast accuracy protocols for these variables is within .25 meters for wave height, and within 2 seconds for wave period. I used mean absolute error to evaluate the accuracy of my model. 

## Dataset

My data was transmitted by buoy sites managed by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association (NOAA). These buoys produced wave height, wave period, time variables, and other wave properties, but only the height, period and time variables were ultimately utilized in the final analysis. I utilized 3 - 3.5 years of hourly data from three buoy locations along the California Coast. Here is a link to NOAA's website, where the buoy data was obtained. 
[Buoy Data](http://www.ndbc.noaa.gov/)

## Models

Seasonal ARIMA

Gradient Boosted Regression using: 
  1. Time Variables
  2. *Time lagged values* of the response variables, wave height and period.
